# 6/21/2021
# Core Concepts in Symbolic Logic

By end of class today we should know:
- How to define arguments
- Definition of validity
- Definition of soundness

Primarily, we will focus on the notion of logical consequence. We will spend a lot of time trying to figure out whether a conclusion is actually supported by the premises. This is more like a math class than a philosophy class.

##### Issues with the textbook:
Sometimes the answer key has typos or uses symbols that have not been introduced.

##### Coursework breakdown:
7 homework assignments (20%), 5 quizzes (15%), daily in-class exercises (15%), midterm (25%), final (25%)

First assignment due this Thursday at 5pm. First quiz opens Thursday, due on Saturday.

### What is an argument?
A set of sentences in which some of the sentences (**premises**) are intended to provide evidential support for another one of the sentences (**conclusion**)  
- All men are mortal
- Socrates is a man 
- Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

Premises are "intended" to support the conclusion, however because some arguments are valid and some aren't. Therefore, not all premises are true (bad argument).

### How do you identify an argument
**Indicators**: words or phrases used to indicate that certain propositions are intended to be uses as support for some other proposition Examples: Hence, therefore, because, thus, etc. However, these are not absolute indicators and some premises will not have obvious identifiers and there is no algorithmic way to differentiate non-arguments from arguments.  
Premise indicators (since, as, because) and conclusion indicators (hence, thus, so):  
"**Since** the Dodgers have improved their hitting, they will win the Western division" vs "The Dodgers have improved their hitting, **therefore** they will win the Western division

### Putting arguments in standard form
1. Identify the premises and conclusion
2. List and number all of the premises and draw a line under the last one
3. Write and number the conclusion under the line

Example: "**Since** all dogs go to heaven and Old Yeller is a dog, **it follows** that Old Yeller will go to heaven
1. All dogs go to heaven
2. Old Yeller is a dog  
_-_----------------------
3. Old Yeller will go to heaven

Sometimes we will see sub-conclusions, in which a chain of argumentation is presented, and a set of premises may support a conclusion which is immediately used to support another conclusion.

### How to evaluate an argument
Which argument provides the best evidential support for its conclusion? Does the conclusion naturally follow the premises (All men are mortal -> Obama is a mortal vs. some logicians are women -> R. Marcus is a woman) (validity)? Are the premises factually correct (soundness)?

The premises of an argument actually support the conclusion when:
- All the premises are true
- The conclusion *follows* from the premises

If a premise is inconclusive, or is somehow debatable, the premise is faulty.

The **inference** is the level of support for the conclusion that the premises provide. A bad argument can have a good inference, and vice versa. Even further, an argument might have a good premise and a true conslusion, but the inference is not there i.e. "I ate Thai food last night, therefore Biden is the president." (non-sequiter)

### Valid and invalid argument forms
Arguments are valid when the inferences are airtight. An argument is valid if and only if it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false at the same time. Otherwise, it is invalid.

1. All men are mortal.
2. Obama is a man.  
_-_----------------------
3. Obama is mortal.  

Also:  
1. All fish are sheep.
2. Obama is a fish.  
_-_----------------------
3. Obama is a sheep.

**Both valid arguments!**

An argument is invalid when it is possible for the premise to all be true and the conclusion false:
1. 99.99% of biologists believe in evolution
2. Stan is a biologist  
_-_----------------------
3. Stan believes in evolution

Probability is not a part of this class, and so inductive reasoning will not be used regarding validity.

An argument is sound when it is both valid and has all true premises. Otherwise, it is unsound. An argument can be valid and yet be unsound. An argument is unsound when it either is invalid or has at least one false premise.

The validity of an argument is a function of its form or structure, not its content.

### What is Symbolic Logic?
The study of validity. We will learn how to translate arguments into a formal language which will allow us to prove whether an argument is valid or invalid.  
Symbolic logic will help you write clearer sentences and tighter arguments.  
It will help identify hidden assumptions in your own thinking and thoughts of others.  
The tools of symbolic logic are used in other disciplines including computer science, math, linguistics, and cognitive sciences.

Symbolic logic will not help us to prove factuality of premises, nor will it help evaluate arguments depending on premises with high degrees of probability. Symbolic logic is focused on evidential support not persuasion.

### Main Points
- An argument one of which is called ‘the conclusion’ and the rest of which are called ‘premises.’ The premises are the propositions offered in defense of the conclusion
- An argument is valid when it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false at the same time.
- An argument is invalid when it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false at the same time.
- An argument is sound when it is both valid and has all true premises.
- An argument is unsound when it is either invalid or has at least one false premise.
- The validity of an argument is a function of its form, not its content.
- An argument form is valid when it is impossible for any argument having that form to have all true premises and a false conclusion.
- An argument form is invalid when it is possible for an argument having that form to have all true premises and a false conclusion.