# 6/22/2021
# Language of Sentential Logic

### Recap:
What is an argument?  
What is a premise? A conclusion?  
How do we present an argument is standard form?  
How do we evaluate an argument?  
What is a valid/invalid argument? What is a sound/unsound argument?

## Transcribing ordinary sentences into sentence logic

### Background Concepts
#### Sentential logic
The study of logic of five types of declaritive sentences and their role in args
- conjunctions
- disjunctions
- negations
- conditionals
- biconditionals
#### Declarative Sentences
Declaratives are either true or false (usually)
We won't deal with any other types of sentences:
- questions: a request for info
- commands: an order
- expressives: utterances of emotion
- performatives: sentences which "alter" reality
#### Atomic sentences, connectives, and compound sentences
Atomic sentences are declarative sentences which cannot be broken down into smaller declarative sentences.  
Connectives are expressions with one or more declaratives joined by a conjuction word (and, or) or phrase (if and only if, because). Connectives can be 1-placed (unary), 2-placed (binary), or multi-placed (more than two).  
Compound sentences are a grammatically correct combination of connectives and atomic sentences.  
The 5 connectives which will most commonly use are: and, or, if/then, if and only if, & not

### Transcription rules
To transcribe an atomic sentence into sentential logic, start by replacing the sentence with a letter (John skates barefoot -> B). The choice of letter is usually arbitrary, as long as it doesn't conflict with previously assigned letters.  
A **conjunction** (&) is two atomics joined by a connective (John is tall -> J; Sarah is short -> S; John is tall and Sarah is short -> J&S). Note that some words in English like but, although, etc. don't syntactically mean and, but are translated as so.  
A **disjunction** (v) is a "or" statement (John is tall -> J; Sarah is short -> S; John is tallor Sarah is short -> JvS).  
A **negation** (~) is a "not" statement (John is tall; John is not short -> ~J).  
A **conditional** (&sup;) is two atomics connected with "if" and "then." The "if" clause is known the **antecedent**, and the **consequent** is the "then" clause. Antecedents and consequents are *not* associative (i.e. A &sup; B &ne; B &sup; A).  
A **biconditional** is an "if and only if" statement, where the truth of an atomic relies on the truth of another atomic (i.e. Sarah is tall if and only if James is short) and the relation *is* associative ( (A &sup; B) & (B &sup; A) -> A &equiv; B).

#### Using parentheses
> "Either I will go home and watch TV or I will think about the election" 

vs. 

> "I will go home and either watch TV or think about the election"  

Let H = "I will go home",  
T = "I will watch TV,  
E="I will think about the election"  

> H & T v E could represent both!

So, we use parentheses:

> "Either (I will go home and watch TV) or I will think about the election:"  

(H & T) v E  

>I will go home and either (watch TV or think about the election)"  

H & (T v E)

#### Scope of a connective
Refers to the range of sentences that a connective applies to. Scope is determined by use of parentheses.
#### Scope of negation
Scope of negations is the first well formed formula to its right:
- ~F: scope is F
- ~F & G: scope is F
- ~(F&G): scope is F & G
- ~(G & (P v ~Q)): scope of 2nd neg is Q, scope of 1st neg is G & (P v ~Q)
#### Main connective
The connective with the widest scope is the main connective. It tells us what sort of statement the whole statement is. 

### Identifying form of arguments
First, put the argument into standard form, then translate each premise and conclusion into sentential logic.
"If James is at least 21, then he can drink legally. He cannot drink legally. Consequently, he is not at least 21."
1) If James is at least 21, then he can drink legally  
2) He cannot drink legally  
_-_----------------------  
3) He is not at least 21

In sentential form:  
Let A = James is at least 21, B = he can drink legally;  
1) A &sup; B  
2) ~B  
_-_----------------------  
3) ~A

### Main Topics
- Be able to transcribe ordinary english sentences in the language of SL.
- Be able to identify the scope of each connective.
- Be able to identify the main connective of each compound statement and classify the compound statement as a conjunction, a disjunction, a negation, a conditional, or a biconditional
- Keep an eye out for scope ambiguities.