# 6/28/2021
# Truth Tables


### Syntax of Sentential Logic
**Syntax** of a language is mostly its grammar, or the rules for combining words, symbols, phrases, or sentences. If something is out of place, or missing, then we encounter a syntax error.

Syntax has to do with the rules for combining words or phrases within a language.  
**Semantics** has to do with the meanings of words or phrases in a language.  

Expressions in sentential logic are called *well-formed formulas*. The rules for forming these are:
- **Atomic Statements:** Letter representations (variables) of sentences should be well-formed to start with (i.e. they refer to a single part of a declarative sentence).
- **Negations:** If X is a well-formed formula, then so is ~X
- **Conjunctions:** If X and Y are well-formed formulas, then (X & Y) is well-formed formula
- **Disjunctions:** If X and Y are well-formed formulas, then (X &or; Y) is well-formed formula
- **Conditionals:** If X and Y are well-formed formulas, then (X &sup; Y) is well-formed formula
- **Biconditionals:** If X and Y are well-formed formulas, then (X &equiv; Y) is well-formed formula

There are no other forms of well-formed formulas in sentential logic.  
Strictly speaking, every well-formed formula with one or more connectives is supposed to have surrounding parentheses, but it is customary to omit these:
- (X & Y & Z) => X & Y & Z
- (~X) => ~X

In order to understand the meaning of a declarative sentence, you have to know the conditions of truth. If we say "Iris has a cold," the meaning becomes deeper and deeper as we consider the conditions under which it is true or false (I.e. is she faking? does she have something more serious?)

### Concepts Required to Build Semantics
Each of the 5 connectives are **truth-functional connectives.**

A connective is truth-functional when the truth or false quality of the compound statement is determined by its component sentences.

"It is not the case" is a truth-functional connective, whereas "I believe that" introduces subjectivity and is NOT a truth-functional connective.

### Truth Tables
Each row constitutes a **truth-value assignment**, or a specification of the truth-values for each of the sentence letters in a sentence.

A truth table for a sentence is the details of all possible truth-value assignments for variables assigned to its atomic sentences which occur in the sentence **and** a specification of the truth-value of the entire sentence for each of these assignments.

#### Negations (~)

|  P  |  ~P |
| --- | --- |
|  T  |  F  |
|  F  |  T  |

#### Conjunctions (&)

|  P  |  Q  | P & Q |
| --- | --- | ----- |
|  T  |  T  |   T   |
|  T  |  F  |   F   |
|  F  |  T  |   F   |
|  F  |  F  |   F   |

#### Disjunctions (&or;)

|  P  |  Q  | P &or; Q |
| --- | --- | -------- |
|  T  |  T  |    T     |
|  T  |  F  |    T     |
|  F  |  T  |    T     |
|  F  |  F  |    F     |

With the exclusive-or (XOR: &oplus; or &veebar;), then the case of P is true and Q is true would be false.

#### Conditionals (&sup;)

|  P  |  Q  | P &sup; Q |
| --- | --- | --------- |
|  T  |  T  |     T     |
|  T  |  F  |     F     |
|  F  |  T  |     T     |
|  F  |  F  |     T     |

#### Biconditional (&equiv;)

|  P  |  Q  | P &equiv; Q |
| --- | --- | ----------- |
|  T  |  T  |      T      |
|  T  |  F  |      F      |
|  F  |  T  |      F      |
|  F  |  F  |      T      |

### Constructing Truth Tables for Complex Sentences
- **Step 1:**  List all of the distinct sentence letters to the left of the vertical line 
- **Step 2:**  Determine how many rows you will need.  The number of rows = 2<sup>n</sup> where n is the number variables in the compound statement. 
- **Step 3:**  List all of the truth value combinations.
- **Step 4:** Determine the truth-value of the statements whose connectives have the  the smallest scope and then progressively work your out.
- **Step 5:** Once you have determined the truth value of all of the component parts, work out the truth-value of the entire sentence