# 6/29/2021
# Truth Tables pt 2

## Proving Equivalence With Truth-Tables
Consider the claim "if p, then q" versus "either not p, or q:"

P &sup; Q &equest; ~P &or; Q

To prove equivalence, construct a single truth table for both statements and compare their truth values.

|  P  |  Q  | P &sup; Q | ~P &or; Q |
| --- | --- | --------- | --------- |
|  T  |  T  |     T     |     T     |
|  T  |  F  |     F     |     F     |
|  F  |  T  |     T     |     T     |
|  F  |  F  |     T     |     T     |

If the sentences have the same truth values for every row, they are truth-functionally equivalent. Otherwise, if every row does not match, they are not truth-functionally equivalent.

## Proving Logical Truths with Truth-Tables
A sentence in sentential logic is a logical truth (aka necessary truth) if and only if it is true in all possible cases, that is, it comes out true on every row of the truth-table (ex. P v ~P):

|  P  | P v ~P |
| --- | ------ |
|  T  |    T   |
|  F  |    T   |

## Proving Contradictions with Truth-Tables
On the other hand, a contradiction (necessary falsehood) is false in every case (ex P & ~P)

|  P  | P & ~P |
| --- | ------ |
|  T  |    F   |
|  F  |    F   |

## Proving Contingencies with Truth-Tables
Contingencies are sentences which are possibly true or false (ex P v P)

|  P  | P v P |
| --- | ----- |
|  T  |   T   |
|  F  |   F   |

## Proving Validity with Truth-Tables
**Recall:** An argument is valid if and only if it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false at the same time. Otherwise, it is invalid. The validity of an argument is a function of its *form or structure, not its content*.

- **Step 1:** Identify the form of the argument by translating each premise and the conclusion into variables representing atomic sentences.
- **Step 2:** Construct a truth table for the argument form
-- Make rows for every variable truth-value combination (2<sup>n</sup> rows for n variables)
-- List each premise in its own column, with the conclusion following last
-- Determine the truth value of each premise and the conclusion
- **Step 3:** Mark each row with an asterisk when it is the case that every premise is true, regardless of the conclusion
- **Step 4:** For each row marked with an asterisk, examine the conclusion. If the conclusion is false, write *counterexample* to indicate it is invalid.
- **Step 5:** If there are no rows marked as counterexamples, then the argument is valid.

Consider:  
1) P &sup; Q
2) ~P  
_-_-----------  
3) ~Q

|  P  |  Q  | P &sup; Q | ~P  |  ~Q | |
| --- | --- | --------- | --- | --- | --- |
|  T  |  T  |     T     |  F  |  F  |  |
|  T  |  F  |     F     |  F  |  T  |  |
|  F  |  T  |     T     |  T  |  F  | * counterexample |
|  F  |  F  |     T     |  T  |  T  | *  |