# 7/13/2021
# Translations in Predicate Logic

We will spend the rest of the class learning about predicate logic, a powerful methodology which was very influential for huge advances in technology.

## What is Predicate Logic?
Sentential logic is mostly reasoning about sentences, when atomic sentences are combined using truth-functional connectives.

Predicate logic will focus on reasoning about **objects** and their **properties**, as well as **relations** to other objects and their properties. A logical situation involving multiple objects, properties, and relations is called a **structure**.

Like Calculus with Newton and Leibnitz, who both discovered the mathematical methodology simultaneously, there are two philosophers who developed predicate logic independent of each other in the 19th century: Charles Sanders Pierce & Gottlob Frege. Both were primarily interested in systemizing mathematical reasoning.

## Limits of Sentential Logic
If an argument is adequately translated into sentential logic, and shown to be valid using natural deduction or a truth table, then the argument is indeed valid. In contrast, sentential logic cannot consistently prove that an argument is invalid.

Sentential logic illustrates atomic sentences and ignores their internal structures. Predicate logic allows us to describe those details more precisely.

## Language and Syntax of Predicate Logic
Parts of sentential logic will carry right over to this new predicate logic. Parentheses are still used to indicate scope of connectives, and all of our usual connectives are still present (&, &or;, ~, &sup;, &equiv;).

### Singular Terms and Predicates
Predicate logic deals with the structure of sentences. We can break a sentence into a *subject* and a *predicate*:

> Sienna is tall

"Sienna" is the singular subject, and "is tall" is the predicate.

In predicate logic, capital letters indicate predicates. Lower case letters a-v represent a single object, or subject. Lower case letters w-z are used as variables for unspecified objects. In other words, a-v are used for named objects, and w-z are used as variables.


**_Transcription key:_**
a: Adam
e: Eve
c: Cid
Cx: x is a cat
Tx: x is tall

> 1. Cid is tall
> 2. If Cid is tall, then Eve is a cat
> _-_---------------------------
> 3. Cid is a cat unless Adam is tall

1. Tc
2. Tc &sup; Ce
_-_--------------------------
3. Ta &sup; Cc

In addition to using capital letters for properties, we can use them for relations as well. The syntax places the relational predicate first, followed by its subjects.

> Chicago is between Los Angeles and New York

Let:  
**Bxyz** = x is between y and z,  
**c** = Chicago,  
**l** = Los Angeles,  
**n** = New York  
&rArr; **Bcln**

Notice that the order of the terms in a relational statement matters very much! **Bncl** and **Bcln** mean very different things. Typically, we will order the active subject first and the passive object(s) second.

### X-placed Predicates
Common nouns and verbs are represented by capital letters with one or more places:
- **1-place predicates:** Predicate involving common nouns ("is a boy") and intransitive verbs (verbs that take a single subject like "runs")
- **2-place predicates:** Verbs which take two object subjects (Adam loves Eve)
- **3-place predicates:** Verbs which relate a primary subject to two other subjects (Chicago is between LA and NYC)

### Quantifiers and variables
When we are talking about groups of subjects ("everyone," "someone," "a few"), we must use quantity terms to describe our argument.

Similarly to math, we can have a **domain** of possible subjects depending on the class of objects we are talking about. For instance, a domain of California in the sentence "Everyone loves Adam" indicates everyone in California loves Adam. Thus, we must specify the domain that we are operating in (i.e. Domain = {Residents of California}).

The **universal quantifier** (&forall;) indicates that each and every member of the domain participates in the predicate. The **existential quantifier** (&exist;) indicates that some, but not all, members participate (a subset).
Ex:

> Everyone loves Adam

(&forall;x)Lxa

> Someone loves Adam

(&exist;x)Lxa

Quantifiers have scope qualities as well, and a quantifier *governs* the first well-formed formula to its right.

> Someone is both happy and tall

(&exist;x)(Hx & Tx)

> Someone is happy and someone is tall

(&exist;x)Hx & (&exist;x)Tx

## Main Points
- When we are doing over Predicate Logic, we are speaking about the objects in a set called the domain.
- Capital Letters A-Z are used for the properties that some or all objects in our domain may possess and for relations that some or all of the members of the domain may have with one another.
- Lower case letters a-v are used as singular terms (i.e. names for specific objects in our domain).
- Lower case letters w-z are used as variables for members in the domain.
- (∀x) is the universal quantifier and means “Each member in the domain is such that....”
- (∃x) is the existential quantifier and means “There exists is at least one member of the domain such that...”