# 7/19/2021
# Semantics for Predicate Logic
We'll be learning how to prove whether arguments are invalid or not in predicate logic. In particular, it will be explained how to expand quantifiers and substitute objects for variables to find a possible case where a quantified premise may be false, thereby rendering the argument invalid. However, it will **not** be shown yet how to prove that an argument is valid.

## Expansions and Substitution Instances
For a claim like "everyone is tall," we can substitute specific objects into the sentence, creating an infinitely long series of "and" statements. Conversely, a claim like "someone is tall" can be converted into a series of "or" statements. Each statement is called a **substitution instance** and the series of instances is called the **expansion** of the sentence.

In other words, a substitution instance is formed by dropping the quantifier, and *substituting* each newly freed variable with a name for each member of the domain. These instances are linked by "and" or "or" connectives depending on the state of the quantifier (universal vs. existential).

When generating a substitution instance, each variable bound by a quantifier must be replaced with the same substitution name/object. Care must be taken not to miss a bound variable, or to mix variables bound by different quantifiers. Scope must also be carefully considered to accurately identify the main quantifier, especially in negations of complete sentences.

For a domain {a, e}:

> (&exist;x)(Bx v Tx) 

**(Ba v Ta) v (Be v Te)**

> (&exist;x)(&forall;y)(Lxy & Py)

**(&forall;y)(Lay & Py) v (&forall;y)(Ley & Py)**

> ~(&forall;x)(Bx &sup; Px)

**~[(Ba &sup; Pa) & (Be &sup; Pe)]**

> (&exist;x) Sx v ~(&forall;y)(&exist;x)Lyx

**(Sa v Se) v ~[(Laa v Lae) & (Lea v Lee)]**

## Interpretations and Truth Values of Sentences in Predicate Logic
An interpretation consists of definitions of:
- A domain
- Names or objects, if any
- Predicates, if any
- **Truth values** of individual combinations of names/objects and predicates

**Truth values** are specified cases of a subject-predicate sentence. We will need to consider these truth value cases when interpreting the truth value of a quantified statement, by expanding the statement and considering each of its substitution instances.

For a domain {a, e} with truth values of **~Ba, Be, Laa, ~Lea, Lae, ~Lee:**

> (&forall;x)(Bx &sup; Lxa)

Expands to (Ba ⊃ Laa) & (Be ⊃ Lea) which is false

> (&exist;x)(&forall;y)Lxy 

Expands to (Laa & Lae) v (Lea & Lee) which is true

> ~(&exist;x)Bx

Expands to ~[Ba v Be] which is false

## Main Ideas
- Know how to how to construct substitution instances and expansions of sentences in PL that contain quantifiers. 
- Know how to determine the truth-value of a sentence in PL relative to this or that interpretation