# 7/22/2021
# Derivations in Predicate Logic

## Validity and Invalidity for Predicate Logic
Natural deduction can still be used to prove validity of a predicate logic sentence. Attention must be paid, though, to identifying the main connective. If a quantifier is involved, check to make sure it is not referring to an entire sentence before attempting to use elimination or introduction rules.

## "Easy" Rules
### Universal Elimination
Universal Elimination (&forall;E) allows us to remove the universal quantifier **(&forall;u)** and replace every occurrence of ‘**u**’ in **(...u...)** with any singular term from the domain we choose. In other words, we can use substitution instances to utilize other defined assumed predicates in our argument.

Consider the following argument:  
1. All people are mortal.  
2. Socrates is a person.  
_-_---------------------  
3. Socrates is mortal.

In PL:  
1. **(&forall;x)(Px &sup; Mx)**  
2. **Ps**  
_-_---------------------  
3. **Ms**

Using &forall;E:  
1. **(&forall;x)(Px &sup; Mx)**  
2. **Ps**  
_-_---------------------  
3. **Ps &sup; Ms** 1 &forall;E
4. **Ms** 2, 3 &sup;E

**Every variable** bound by the quantifier must be substituted with the chosen domain member.

#### Removing Overlapping Quantifiers
Remove one quantifier at a time, starting from the quantifier with the largest scope. The key point is that each quantifier can use a separate member from the domain, if desired:

1. **(&forall;x)(&forall;y)(Lxy)**    
_-_---------------------  
2. **(&forall;y)(Lay)** 1 &forall;E
3. **Lae** 2 &forall;E

### Existential Introduction
Existential Introduction (&exist;I) derives an existentially quantified sentence by replacing a singular term with a variable which you then bind with an existential quantifier. In a multiple place predicate, each term must be replaced with a sepearate variable.

Consider:  
1. Richard Nixon is corrupt.  
_-_--------------------------  
2. Something is corrupt.

In PL:  
1. **Cr**  
_-_---------------------  
2. **(&exist;y)Cy** 1 &exist;I

We can also introduce overlapping existential quantifiers in a fairly straightforward manner:  
1. **(&forall;w)(&forall;z)Cwz**
_-_------------
2. **(&forall;z)Caz** 1 &forall;E
3. **Cab** 2 &forall;E
4. **(&exist;z)Caz** 3 &exist;I
5. **(&exist;y)(&exist;z)Cyz** 4 &exist;I